README.md, before:

# Red Wine Quality Prediction Project

This project aims to predict the quality of red wine based on various physicochemical properties. The project will involve exploratory data analysis (EDA), baseline model development, feature engineering, model improvement, integration with FastAPI, Streamlit dashboard development, PostgreSQL database integration, Grafana dashboard creation, workflow management using Apache Airflow, and deployment of the machine learning model.

## Project Overview

The goal of this project is to develop a machine learning model that accurately predicts the quality of red wine based on its physicochemical properties. The project will follow a structured approach, starting from data exploration and preprocessing, model development, integration with various technologies, and deployment in a production-like environment.

## Technologies Used

- Python (programming language)
- Pandas, NumPy, Joblib, Pydantic and other python libraries (full list of dependencies in `requirements.txt`)
- Scikit-learn (machine learning library)
- FastAPI (framework for building APIs)
- Streamlit (framework for building data-driven web applications)
- PostgreSQL (relational database management system)
- Grafana (open-source analytics and monitoring platform)
- Apache Airflow (workflow management platform)

## Installation

Follow these steps to set up and install the project:

1. **Clone the repository:** https://github.com/DSP-on-Wine/red-wine-quality.git

2. **Navigate to the project directory:** `cd red-wine-quality`

### Install Dependencies

1. Make sure you have Python and pip installed on your system.

2. Install the required dependencies using pip: `pip install -r requirements.txt`

### Setting Up PostgreSQL Database

To set up the PostgreSQL database for the project, follow these steps:

1. **Installation:**

   - Go to [PostgreSQL Download Page](https://www.postgresql.org/download/) and download the appropriate installer for your operating system.
   - Follow the on-screen installation instructions.
   - During installation, you will be prompted to create a new admin password.
   - Leave the connection port as 5432.

2. **Create a New PostgreSQL Server:**

   - Open pgAdmin 4.
   - Enter the admin password you input during installation.
   - Create a new server named `wine_quality_local_server`.
   - In the Connection tab, enter the Host name/address as `localhost` and keep the port as `5432`.
   - Default username: `postgres`
   - Password: admin password specified during installation.
   - Save the settings.

3. **Create a New Database:**

   - Right-click on Databases under the `wine_quality_local_server` and choose Create -> Database.
   - Name the database: `wine_quality`.
   - Save the settings.

4. **Create Predictions Table:**

   - Open the query tool and execute the following script to create the predictions table:

     ```sql
     CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS predictions (
         id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
         fixed_acidity FLOAT,
         volatile_acidity FLOAT,
         citric_acid FLOAT,
         residual_sugar FLOAT,
         chlorides FLOAT,
         free_sulfur_dioxide FLOAT,
         total_sulfur_dioxide FLOAT,
         density FLOAT,
         pH FLOAT,
         sulphates FLOAT,
         alcohol FLOAT,
         prediction FLOAT,
         timestamp TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
     );
     ```

5. **Update DATABASE_URL in **init**.py in folder fastapi_app:**

   - In the `__init__.py` file, make sure to update the `DATABASE_URL` variable with the correct connection details:

     ```python
     DATABASE_URL = "postgresql://username:password@host:port/databasename"
     # Example:
     DATABASE_URL = "postgresql://postgres:123@localhost:5432/wine_quality"
     ```

6. **Run the FastAPI Notebook:**

   - If you have the fastapi app running, run the `fastapi.ipynb` notebook to save a prediction in the database. If not, follow the following section on how to launch the fastapi app.

   We will not be using the `postgreSQL.ipynb` notebook for this exercise.

By following these steps, you can effectively set up the PostgreSQL database for the project.

### Testing the API with Sample Data

To test the FastAPI API with sample data, you can use the provided Jupyter notebook `fastapi.ipynb`. This notebook sends a POST request to the `/predict/` endpoint with sample input data and displays the prediction received from the API response.

Follow these steps to test the API using the notebook:

1. **Run the Server:**

   Before testing the API, ensure that your FastAPI server is running locally. If you haven't started the server yet, follow these steps:

   - Open a terminal or command prompt.
   - Navigate to the directory containing your FastAPI application script (e.g., `main.py`).
   - Run the following command to start the FastAPI server:

     ```bash
     uvicorn fastapi_app.main:app --reload
     ```

     This command starts the FastAPI server with automatic reloading enabled, allowing you to make changes to the code and see the effects without restarting the server manually.

2. **Open the Jupyter Notebook:**

   Open the `fastapi.ipynb` notebook in your Jupyter environment.

3. **Execute the Notebook Cells:**

   Execute the cells in the notebook sequentially to send a POST request to the FastAPI server with sample input data.

4. **Check the Prediction:**

   After executing the notebook cells, the notebook will display the prediction returned by the FastAPI server.

5. **Review the Results:**

   Review the prediction obtained from the FastAPI server to ensure that it aligns with the expected output.

6. **Experiment with Different Data:**

   Feel free to experiment with different sample data by modifying the values in the `sample_data` dictionary and re-executing the notebook cells.

By following these steps, you can effectively test the FastAPI API with sample data using the provided notebook.

### Running the Streamlit App

Once the dependencies are installed, you can run the Streamlit app using the following command:

```bash
streamlit run streamlit_app/main.py
```

This will start the Streamlit server, and you can access the app in your web browser at http://localhost:8501.

You should now be able to view the dataset used for training the model, and input details of new wine to get predictions.

### Apache Airflow Docker Installation Guide (for Windows)

This guide will help you set up Apache Airflow with Docker and ingest the `winequality-red.csv` file using the `ingest_data.py` DAG.

#### Prerequisites

Before proceeding with the installation, ensure that you have the following prerequisites:

- **Docker Community Edition (CE)**: Install Docker CE on your Windows system. You can follow the installation guides found [here](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/windows-install/).
- **Docker Compose v4.27.0 or newer**: Docker Compose is usually included with Docker Desktop for Windows installations. Ensure that you have a version of Docker Compose that is compatible with your Docker CE installation.
- **At least 4GB of memory allocated for Docker**: Adjust the Docker memory settings to allocate at least 4GB of memory for Docker containers. This can be done through the Docker Desktop settings.

#### Installation Steps

1. **Navigate to the project directory:**

   ```bash
   cd airflow
   ```

   - Make sure that you have the file `docker-compose.yaml` in this directory. If not, please pull from the remote branch and try again.

2. **Create necessary directories:**

   ```bash
   mkdir logs, plugins, config
   ```

3. **Start Airflow using Docker Compose:**

   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   ```

4. **Access Airflow web interface:**
   - Once the services are up and running, you can access the Airflow web interface at [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080).
   - Use the following credentials to log in:
     - **Username:** airflow
     - **Password:** airflow

#### Usage

- After launching Airflow, you can start using the DAGs located in the `dags` directory.
- Place your DAG files in the `dags` directory to schedule and execute tasks.

#### Cleanup

- To stop and remove containers, as well as delete volumes with database data, run:
  ```bash
  docker-compose down --volumes --remove-orphans
  ```

### Data Preparation Using `data_preparation.ipynb`

To prepare the `winequality-red.csv` dataset for ingestion, follow these steps:

1. **Create a `raw_data` Folder:**

   - Navigate to the root directory of the project.
   - Create a folder named `raw-data`.

2. **Ensure CSV Location:**

   - Make sure the `winequality-red.csv` file is present in the root directory of the project.

3. **Open and Run the Notebook:**

   - Open the `data_preparation.ipynb` notebook using your preferred Jupyter Notebook environment.
   - In the notebook, ensure that the file path to `winequality-red.csv` is correctly set to point to its location in the root directory. If you are preparing another file, please change the location accordingly.

4. **Run the Notebook Cells:**

   - Execute the cells in the notebook sequentially.
   - The notebook will split the `winequality-red.csv` dataset, randomize the rows, and store them in separate CSV files within the `raw_data` folder.

5. **Verify Output:**

   - After running all cells, check the `raw_data` folder to confirm that the dataset has been split and stored correctly.
   - Each CSV file in the `raw_data` folder will contain a subset of the original dataset, with 10 rows per file. You can validate that the files each contain 10 rows of data, and there are the correct number of new files created.

By following these steps, you can effectively prepare the dataset for ingestion.

## Contributors

### The Data Vintners

- [Bemnet Assefa](https://github.com/Beemnet)
- [Zeineb Rania Labidi](https://github.com/ZeinebRania)
- [Riwa Masaad](https://github.com/Masaad-Riwa)
- [Aichen Sun](https://github.com/as5419)
- [Chorten Tsomo Tamang](https://github.com/Chorten-Tsomo)

Commit message:

added .env file, modifications to the ingestion dag and docker-compose files

README.md, after:

# Red Wine Quality Prediction Project

This project aims to predict the quality of red wine based on various physicochemical properties. The project will involve exploratory data analysis (EDA), baseline model development, feature engineering, model improvement, integration with FastAPI, Streamlit dashboard development, PostgreSQL database integration, Grafana dashboard creation, workflow management using Apache Airflow, and deployment of the machine learning model.

## Project Overview

The goal of this project is to develop a machine learning model that accurately predicts the quality of red wine based on its physicochemical properties. The project will follow a structured approach, starting from data exploration and preprocessing, model development, integration with various technologies, and deployment in a production-like environment.

## Technologies Used

- Python (programming language)
- Pandas, NumPy, Joblib, Pydantic and other python libraries (full list of dependencies in `requirements.txt`)
- Scikit-learn (machine learning library)
- FastAPI (framework for building APIs)
- Streamlit (framework for building data-driven web applications)
- PostgreSQL (relational database management system)
- Grafana (open-source analytics and monitoring platform)
- Apache Airflow (workflow management platform)

## Installation

Follow these steps to set up and install the project:

1. **Clone the repository:** https://github.com/DSP-on-Wine/red-wine-quality.git

2. **Navigate to the project directory:** `cd red-wine-quality`

### Install Dependencies

1. Make sure you have Python and pip installed on your system.

2. Install the required dependencies using pip: `pip install -r requirements.txt`

### Setting Up PostgreSQL Database

To set up the PostgreSQL database for the project, follow these steps:

1. **Installation:**

   - Go to [PostgreSQL Download Page](https://www.postgresql.org/download/) and download the appropriate installer for your operating system.
   - Follow the on-screen installation instructions.
   - During installation, you will be prompted to create a new admin password.
   - Leave the connection port as 5432.

2. **Create a New PostgreSQL Server:**

   - Open pgAdmin 4.
   - Enter the admin password you input during installation.
   - Create a new server named `wine_quality_local_server`.
   - In the Connection tab, enter the Host name/address as `localhost` and keep the port as `5432`.
   - Default username: `postgres`
   - Password: admin password specified during installation.
   - Save the settings.

3. **Create a New Database:**

   - Right-click on Databases under the `wine_quality_local_server` and choose Create -> Database.
   - Name the database: `wine_quality`.
   - Save the settings.

4. **Create Predictions Table:**

   - Open the query tool and execute the following script to create the predictions table:

     ```sql
     CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS predictions (
         id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
         fixed_acidity FLOAT,
         volatile_acidity FLOAT,
         citric_acid FLOAT,
         residual_sugar FLOAT,
         chlorides FLOAT,
         free_sulfur_dioxide FLOAT,
         total_sulfur_dioxide FLOAT,
         density FLOAT,
         pH FLOAT,
         sulphates FLOAT,
         alcohol FLOAT,
         prediction FLOAT,
         timestamp TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
     );
     ```

5. **Update DATABASE_URL in **init**.py in folder fastapi_app:**

   - In the `__init__.py` file, make sure to update the `DATABASE_URL` variable with the correct connection details:

     ```python
     DATABASE_URL = "postgresql://username:password@host:port/databasename"
     # Example:
     DATABASE_URL = "postgresql://postgres:123@localhost:5432/wine_quality"
     ```

6. **Run the FastAPI Notebook:**

   - If you have the fastapi app running, run the `fastapi.ipynb` notebook to save a prediction in the database. If not, follow the following section on how to launch the fastapi app.

   We will not be using the `postgreSQL.ipynb` notebook for this exercise.

By following these steps, you can effectively set up the PostgreSQL database for the project.

### Testing the API with Sample Data

To test the FastAPI API with sample data, you can use the provided Jupyter notebook `fastapi.ipynb`. This notebook sends a POST request to the `/predict/` endpoint with sample input data and displays the prediction received from the API response.

Follow these steps to test the API using the notebook:

1. **Run the Server:**

   Before testing the API, ensure that your FastAPI server is running locally. If you haven't started the server yet, follow these steps:

   - Open a terminal or command prompt.
   - Navigate to the directory containing your FastAPI application script (e.g., `main.py`).
   - Run the following command to start the FastAPI server:

     ```bash
     uvicorn fastapi_app.main:app --reload
     ```

     This command starts the FastAPI server with automatic reloading enabled, allowing you to make changes to the code and see the effects without restarting the server manually.

2. **Open the Jupyter Notebook:**

   Open the `fastapi.ipynb` notebook in your Jupyter environment.

3. **Execute the Notebook Cells:**

   Execute the cells in the notebook sequentially to send a POST request to the FastAPI server with sample input data.

4. **Check the Prediction:**

   After executing the notebook cells, the notebook will display the prediction returned by the FastAPI server.

5. **Review the Results:**

   Review the prediction obtained from the FastAPI server to ensure that it aligns with the expected output.

6. **Experiment with Different Data:**

   Feel free to experiment with different sample data by modifying the values in the `sample_data` dictionary and re-executing the notebook cells.

By following these steps, you can effectively test the FastAPI API with sample data using the provided notebook.

### Running the Streamlit App

Once the dependencies are installed, you can run the Streamlit app using the following command:

```bash
streamlit run streamlit_app/main.py
```

This will start the Streamlit server, and you can access the app in your web browser at http://localhost:8501.

You should now be able to view the dataset used for training the model, and input details of new wine to get predictions.

### Apache Airflow Docker Installation Guide (for Windows)

This guide will help you set up Apache Airflow with Docker and ingest the `winequality-red.csv` file using the `ingest_data.py` DAG.

#### Prerequisites

Before proceeding with the installation, ensure that you have the following prerequisites:

- **Docker Community Edition (CE)**: Install Docker CE on your Windows system. You can follow the installation guides found [here](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/windows-install/).
- **Docker Compose v4.27.0 or newer**: Docker Compose is usually included with Docker Desktop for Windows installations. Ensure that you have a version of Docker Compose that is compatible with your Docker CE installation.
- **At least 4GB of memory allocated for Docker**: Adjust the Docker memory settings to allocate at least 4GB of memory for Docker containers. This can be done through the Docker Desktop settings.

#### Installation Steps

1. **Navigate to the project directory:**

   ```bash
   cd airflow
   ```

   - Make sure that you have the file `docker-compose.yaml` in this directory. If not, please pull from the remote branch and try again.
   - The two additional volumes were added to the `docker-compose.yaml` to specify the raw_data and good_data volumes.
   ```bash
   ${RAW_DATA_DIR}:/opt/airflow/raw_data
   ${GOOD_DATA_DIR}:/opt/airflow/good_data
   ```

2. **Create necessary directories:**

   ```bash
   mkdir logs, plugins, config
   ```

3. **Modify paths in .env file:**

Modify the paths in the .env file
RAW_DATA_DIR and GOOD_DATA_DIR should specify the paths of the raw_data and good_data folders.

   ```bash
   AIRFLOW_IMAGE_NAME=apache/airflow:2.8.4
   AIRFLOW_UID=50000
   RAW_DATA_DIR = '../raw_data'
   GOOD_DATA_DIR = '../good_data'
   ``` 
   
4. **Start Airflow using Docker Compose:**

   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   ```

5. **Make sure docker is enable in the windows firewall.**

4. **Access Airflow web interface:**
   - Once the services are up and running, you can access the Airflow web interface at [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080).
   - Use the following credentials to log in:
     - **Username:** airflow
     - **Password:** airflow

#### Usage

- After launching Airflow, you can start using the DAGs located in the `dags` directory.
- Place your DAG files in the `dags` directory to schedule and execute tasks.

#### Cleanup

- To stop and remove containers, as well as delete volumes with database data, run:
  ```bash
  docker-compose down --volumes --remove-orphans
  ```

### Data Preparation Using `data_preparation.ipynb`

To prepare the `winequality-red.csv` dataset for ingestion, follow these steps:

1. **Create a `raw_data` Folder:**

   - Navigate to the root directory of the project.
   - Create a folder named `raw-data`.

2. **Ensure CSV Location:**

   - Make sure the `winequality-red.csv` file is present in the root directory of the project.

3. **Open and Run the Notebook:**

   - Open the `data_preparation.ipynb` notebook using your preferred Jupyter Notebook environment.
   - In the notebook, ensure that the file path to `winequality-red.csv` is correctly set to point to its location in the root directory. If you are preparing another file, please change the location accordingly.

4. **Run the Notebook Cells:**

   - Execute the cells in the notebook sequentially.
   - The notebook will split the `winequality-red.csv` dataset, randomize the rows, and store them in separate CSV files within the `raw_data` folder.

5. **Verify Output:**

   - After running all cells, check the `raw_data` folder to confirm that the dataset has been split and stored correctly.
   - Each CSV file in the `raw_data` folder will contain a subset of the original dataset, with 10 rows per file. You can validate that the files each contain 10 rows of data, and there are the correct number of new files created.

By following these steps, you can effectively prepare the dataset for ingestion.

## Contributors

### The Data Vintners

- [Bemnet Assefa](https://github.com/Beemnet)
- [Zeineb Rania Labidi](https://github.com/ZeinebRania)
- [Riwa Masaad](https://github.com/Masaad-Riwa)
- [Aichen Sun](https://github.com/as5419)
- [Chorten Tsomo Tamang](https://github.com/Chorten-Tsomo)
